README.md, before:

# Crypty Delta Algo

Automated delta-hedged options trading system for Delta Exchange, paired with a Streamlit control panel for live monitoring. The trading engine orchestrates short strangle entries, manages risk through configurable rules, and exposes rich telemetry for operators.

## Features

- **Contract-aware P&L** — scales performance metrics by the BTC contract size used on Delta Exchange.
- **Concurrent leg execution** — enters and exits both call and put legs simultaneously for tighter fills.
- **Resilient scheduling** — supports next-day exit rollovers when exit times fall before the trade window ends.
- **Live dashboard** — Streamlit UI surfaces current positions, premium capture, and UTC-stamped logs.
- **Structured logging** — summary and detailed log files power analytics and troubleshooting.

## Project structure

```text
production_delta_trader.py  # Main trading engine loop
streamlit_app.py            # Streamlit dashboard for monitoring & control
config_loader.py            # Shared configuration helpers
trading_config.py           # Baseline trading parameters
ui_config_snapshot.json     # Snapshot of UI selections (read by Streamlit)
ui_overrides.json           # Operator overrides persisted from the UI
requirements.txt            # Python dependencies
.env                        # Environment variables (API keys and tuning)
```

## Getting started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- Delta Exchange account with API credentials
- Optional: virtual environment manager (`python -m venv`, `conda`, etc.)

### Installation

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Configuration

1. Review `.env` for API keys and runtime parameters. Replace placeholder values with live credentials if needed.
2. Adjust `trading_config.py` for global defaults (delta range, quantity, timings).
3. Update `ui_overrides.json` if you want to seed the dashboard with predefined overrides.

> **Note:** The repository currently commits `.env` for operational convenience. Rotate credentials if this repo becomes public and consider encrypting secrets (e.g., with git-crypt or a secrets manager) before wider distribution.

## Running the trading engine

```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
python production_delta_trader.py
```

The engine:
- Loads configuration from `.env`, `trading_config.py`, and override files.
- Places short strangle positions when the configured trade window opens.
- Monitors mark prices, trailing rules, and exit criteria on a recurring loop.
- Logs events to `delta_trader_summary.log` (high-level) and `delta_trader_detailed.log` (diagnostics).

## Streamlit dashboard

```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
streamlit run streamlit_app.py --server.port 8502
```

The dashboard highlights:
- Current UTC timestamp and aligned log entries (newest first).
- Strategy metrics, P&L in USD and percentage of collected premium.
- Control toggles for dry run, websocket usage, and scheduling.

## Logging & monitoring

- `delta_trader_summary.log` — snapshots of key metrics and lifecycle events.
- `delta_trader_detailed.log` — verbose debugging output (API calls, reconciliation steps).
- Streamlit surfaces log tails with UTC context and is ideal for quick triage.

## Deployment tips

- Run the engine under a process supervisor (systemd, pm2, Supervisor) on a reliable VPS.
- Enable OS-level log rotation for `*.log` files if running continuously.
- Keep API credentials restricted to minimal permissions set required for trading.

## Contributing

1. Fork or create a feature branch.
2. Run `pip install -r requirements.txt` to sync dependencies.
3. Validate with `python -m compileall production_delta_trader.py streamlit_app.py` before opening a PR.
4. Submit changes with descriptive commit messages and include updates to docs/tests where relevant.

## License

No explicit license provided. Treat the repository as proprietary unless stated otherwise.

Commit message:

Add trade ledger and Streamlit history tab

README.md, after:

# Crypty Delta Algo

Automated delta-hedged options trading system for Delta Exchange, paired with a Streamlit control panel for live monitoring. The trading engine orchestrates short strangle entries, manages risk through configurable rules, and exposes rich telemetry for operators.

## Features

- **Contract-aware P&L** — scales performance metrics by the BTC contract size used on Delta Exchange.
- **Concurrent leg execution** — enters and exits both call and put legs simultaneously for tighter fills.
- **Resilient scheduling** — supports next-day exit rollovers when exit times fall before the trade window ends.
- **Live dashboard** — Streamlit UI surfaces current positions, premium capture, and UTC-stamped logs.
- **Trade history ledger** — every completed strangle is persisted to JSONL for retrospective analytics and UI summaries.
- **Structured logging** — summary, detailed, and ledger files power analytics and troubleshooting.

## Project structure

```text
production_delta_trader.py  # Main trading engine loop
streamlit_app.py            # Streamlit dashboard for monitoring & control
delta_trader_trades.jsonl   # Append-only trade ledger emitted by the engine (ignored by git)
config_loader.py            # Shared configuration helpers
trading_config.py           # Baseline trading parameters
ui_config_snapshot.json     # Snapshot of UI selections (read by Streamlit)
ui_overrides.json           # Operator overrides persisted from the UI
requirements.txt            # Python dependencies
.env                        # Environment variables (API keys and tuning)
```

## Getting started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- Delta Exchange account with API credentials
- Optional: virtual environment manager (`python -m venv`, `conda`, etc.)

### Installation

```bash
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Configuration

1. Review `.env` for API keys and runtime parameters. Replace placeholder values with live credentials if needed.
2. Adjust `trading_config.py` for global defaults (delta range, quantity, timings).
3. Update `ui_overrides.json` if you want to seed the dashboard with predefined overrides.

> **Note:** The repository currently commits `.env` for operational convenience. Rotate credentials if this repo becomes public and consider encrypting secrets (e.g., with git-crypt or a secrets manager) before wider distribution.

## Running the trading engine

```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
python production_delta_trader.py
```

The engine:
- Loads configuration from `.env`, `trading_config.py`, and override files.
- Places short strangle positions when the configured trade window opens.
- Monitors mark prices, trailing rules, and exit criteria on a recurring loop.
- Logs events to `delta_trader_summary.log` (high-level) and `delta_trader_detailed.log` (diagnostics).

## Streamlit dashboard

```bash
source .venv/bin/activate
streamlit run streamlit_app.py --server.port 8502
```

The dashboard is organized into tabs:
- **Live Dashboard** — strategy status, controls, live metrics, and open-leg breakdowns.
- **Trade History** — aggregated performance, sortable ledger table, and leg-level drilldowns backed by `delta_trader_trades.jsonl`.
- **Logs** — summary and detailed log tails with UTC/IST context for troubleshooting.

## Logging & monitoring

- `delta_trader_summary.log` — snapshots of key metrics and lifecycle events.
- `delta_trader_detailed.log` — verbose debugging output (API calls, reconciliation steps).
- `delta_trader_trades.jsonl` — append-only ledger of completed trades consumed by the dashboard's Trade History tab.
- Streamlit surfaces log tails with UTC context and the Trade History tab for rich retrospectives.

## Deployment tips

- Run the engine under a process supervisor (systemd, pm2, Supervisor) on a reliable VPS.
- Enable OS-level log rotation for `*.log` files if running continuously.
- Keep API credentials restricted to minimal permissions set required for trading.

## Contributing

1. Fork or create a feature branch.
2. Run `pip install -r requirements.txt` to sync dependencies.
3. Validate with `python -m compileall production_delta_trader.py streamlit_app.py` before opening a PR.
4. Submit changes with descriptive commit messages and include updates to docs/tests where relevant.

## License

No explicit license provided. Treat the repository as proprietary unless stated otherwise.
